A N A NALYSIS OF R ADIO M ETEOR D ETECTION
{ C HARLES P OWELL }

E XETER M ATHEMATICS S CHOOL

O VERVIEW

D ETECTION B Y I MAGE A NALYSIS

T EMPORAL , S PATIAL & A NTENNA T YPE VARIATION

Meteors have three stages to their lives. They
start as rocky or metallic bodies in space,
where they are known as meteoroids. Once
a meteoroid enters the Earth’s atmosphere, it
is heated by friction, and this extreme heat
ionises the air around the meteor. This creates
a visible streak which is known as a ‘shooting star’. If any of the meteor makes it to the
ground, it becomes a meteorite. The ionised
air around the meteor reflects radio waves.
This is the fundamental principle behind radio Figure 1: 3D Waterfall
meteor detection. The detection starts with a Plot
transmitting antenna sending out pulses, or a
continuous signal, into the upper atmosphere. The signal reflects off of
the ionised trail left by the meteor, and is received by another antenna.
The way this signal is visualised is typically as a ‘waterfall’ plot (figure 1). Alternatively, software is used to count meteors from the signal.

The idea of detection by image analysis
is to identify areas of the image with a
distinct signal, which are considered to
be meteors (note the large yellow area
in figure 1). I have chosen root mean
square difference as a method of identifying distinct signals. The method
works by calculating a measure of the
difference between corresponding pixels in two images: the signal image,
and a ‘baseline’ image. In order to test Figure 2: RMS difference vs.
how well this method works, I tested RMOB count
for correlation with a set of data that is
known to work: RMOB counts. These are hourly detection counts, also
used in my other studies. The result is a correlation coefficient (using
Pearson’s Moment) of r = 0.6165, with a p-value of p = 4.05 · 10−214 ,
suggesting a correlation between the two data sets (figure 2).

Temporal Variation

W HAT DATA AM I USING ?

Z ENITHAL H OURLY R ATE

For each study I present, the source
of my data is the RMOB organisation
[1]. Started as a group of radio observers hoping to communicate meteor
shower results more easily, this group
has grown into a worldwide network
of radio meteor observation, with each
observers results available for use.
The data itself is an hourly detection
count. This data is available in one
month long sets, as images (figure 8) or
text.

Formula
I have modified the formula for Zenithal Hourly Rate to be used for
radio meteor detection. The formula used for visual detection is equation 1, where F is a correction factor for field of view, r6.5−m corrects
for the limiting magnitude, and HR is the actual visual hourly rate. The
equation has a flaw: the sin function is used to correct for the height of
the radiant (where the meteors ‘appear’ from) above the horizon. This
would result in a negative hourly rate with a radiant below the horizon,
though meteors are still seen.
Figure 8: RMOB data in image
format

I chose to store the text data locally to
aid analysis, rather than accessing the
internet each time more data is needed.
I did this by storing each distinct observer as a Python ‘object’ – a collection
of information about a single real-life
object.
This included the location
of the observer and information on
their detection setup (which antenna, Figure 9: Number of observers
frequencies, etc.) allowing easy access contributing each month
to this information. Each observer also
included a list of all the dates where they had data available, with
an associated ‘entry’ – a single month’s data, which contained a file
location to access the data. This easy access made analysis much easier.
Figure 9 shows the number of observers contributing for each month
since RMOB text records started.
Apart from a sudden drop in 2005, the
number of observers is constantly increasing - good news for radio meteor
detection analysis! Figure 10 shows
the global reach of the RMOB data. Figure 10: Locations of obHowever, it is clear that most data is servers (where known)
from Europe. Overall, there are 3.8
million hourly counts, from 345 observers.

R EFERENCES
[1]

Radio Meteor Observation Bulletin. URL: rmob.org.

[2] W. Singer et al. “Diurnal and annual variations of meteor rates at
latitudes betwen 69◦ N and 35◦ S”. In: 17th ESA Symposium on European Rocket and Balloon Programmes and Related Research (2005).

HR · F · r6.5−m
ZHR =
sin (h)

(1)

N −b
ZHR = 1 h 
2 + π

(2)

My own correction to this is shown in equation 2 (the denominator),
where b is the background hourly rate, N is the actual hourly rate, and
h is the angular height of the radiant above the horizon. F and r6.5−m
are no longer needed since I assume a field of view covering the whole
sky, and the population index model is not valid, since an incredibly
large number of meteors would be detected by radios, but aren’t.

Validity
In order to test the validity of equation 2, I used it to calculate the
theoretical ZHR for 6 common meteors showers for each observer, for
years between 2007 and 2016. Most of the results correlate well with
the expected visual data. The results do not all have values similar
to those expected, though they correlate well since an increase in the
visual results is reflected by an increase in radio results – the offset is
likely due to an absent correction factor. In order to determine this,
I used the results to calculate a theoretical field of view and limiting
magnitude. The results show that the theoretical limiting magnitude of
the antennas used is ∼ 6.75, and the theoretical field of view is ∼ 30%.
This field of view should be larger, as should the limiting magnitude.
This indicates that there is an offset that is not present as a correction
factor. This is expected, however, since I had no data available for
field of view and so it was not included. The field of view is highly
dependent on the antenna, as is the limiting magnitude.

I have analysed
the
variation
of
detection counts
and
other
descriptive
characteristics of the
Figure 3: Variation in mean
data
over
hourly detection count since 2000
time. There
by year
is a significant increase in detection counts between 2005
and 2011 (see figure 3), which correlates to the
minimum of the solar cycle. This indicates
that the activity of the Sun (and most likely the
solar wind) prevents some radio meteor detection. This is not unreasonable, since when
the solar wind has a greater intensity, there is
a greater electron density, which will influence
radio signals.

As well as
this, my results
(figure 4) show
an increase
in detection
counts
in
the middle
of the year,
which persists for the
rest of the Figure 4: Variation in mean
year.
This hourly detection count over a
could be due year
to an increased number of meteor showers, or other
effects which I have not studied. I have found
little variation of detection counts during each
month, as expected, since there are few effects
that vary on a monthly basis. With a 1% significance level, there is no difference between
daytime and night-time detection rates.

Most data characteristics do not correlate well
with latitude or longitude, implying that the
location where a detection takes place has
little impact on the resulting detections. As
expected, there is a correlation between longitude and peak hour of diurnal shift. Some
studies [2] have noted a correlation between
latitude and the intensity of diurnal shift,
though my results do not clearly support this.
The implication of these findings is that, across
the globe, the quality and quantity of radio meteor detection doesn’t change, which in itself
suggests a uniform distribution of sporadic
meteors in space.

Variation by antenna type
Overall, there is little variation between antenna types, and a large degree of variation
within each antenna category, implying that
the antenna has little effect on the results of
radio meteor detection. However, J-pole, log
periodic and turnstile antennas appear to produce the most extreme results. This is likely
due to anomalous readings.

D IURNAL VARIATION OF M ETEOR F LUX
Diurnal variation, also known as diurnal ‘shift’, is an observed increase
and decrease in detection counts
over the course of a day. Some models explain this as the Earth ‘intercepting more sporadic meteors at
Sunrise than Sunset’, those this is
incorrect – the same number of sporadic meteors are intercepted. In
my own model, a correction to the
previous, I propose that the incident
velocity, added to Earth’s orbital ve- Figure 5: Diagram of diurnal shift
locity at Sunrise (∼ 6am observer’s model
local time), results in a higher intercept velocity, meaning more detections occur since more meteors reach the atmosphere (see figure 5).
A sinusoidal function fits the
mean diurnal shift of all available authors well (see figure 6). This indicates that my
model, which is based around
a cosine function, works. It
is apparent that the diurnal
shift occurs worldwide, and
varies in amplitude between
locations. This supports other
studies, unlike my analysis of
spatial variation.

Spatial variation of diurnal shift
Figure 7 shows the peak hour of
an observer’s apparent diurnal
shift in their local time, based on
their longitude, not timezones.
My model predicts that the peak
hour occurs at 6am, and this
is seen in the histogram, indicating that my model fits the
data. There is some spreading
out from this time, as expected
by any set of data, though there
is also a large number of peak
hours at 7am. This is potentially due to changes that occur
in the Earth’s rotation throughout a year.

Figure 7: Histogram of peak hour of diurnal shift in observer’s local time

Temporal variation of diurnal shift
Over time, the peak hour of diurnal shift does not appear to increase
or decrease, which also supports my model since I provide no reason
for the diurnal shift to change with time. Around the time of increased
detection rates between 2005 and 2011, diurnal shift appears to be less
sinusoidal, indicating an increased background rate, supporting my
conclusions from the temporal variation analysis.
Figure 6: Diurnal shifts for various locations

F UTURE W ORK
For many results, there is yet a conclusion to be made. There are many
variables that influence radio meteor detection in conjunction with one
another, making isolation of a variable and consequent analysis diffi-

Spatial Variation

A CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
cult. A larger set of data, with a more uniform coverage of the globe, is
the aim for the future, as well as extensions of the analyses in order to
refine and validate conclusions.

I am indebted to the RMOB organization [1] for permission to use their
data. Credit is also due to the Norman Lockyer Observatory, where I
have worked on this project.

